so this is a talk all about the star tow
setting which is one of the favorites
that seems to turn up in a very large
number of Science Fiction films so I
thought we'd take a look once around to
set to begin with the image you show
there is going to be very relevant with
a large impact and I'll explain why but
first of all where is to setti well it's
in the con stellation of setus the whale
which is uh down to the uh right hand
side below Taurus and right of Orion in
the sky relatively faint
constellation and T setti is one of the
stars that makes up the stick diagram
there a relatively feeble appearing star
from our point of view just magnitude
3.5 now if we were sat at tetti looking
back Soul our sun would be a magnitude
2.6 star and it would be appearing in
the constellation of boutes the herdsman
so clearly aletti is going to be a more
feeble star than our own
Sun it first came to people's attention
because it was noted in the 1800 to
1880s that it had quite a high proper
motion the proper motion is the change
in its position relative to their very
distant background stars from year to
year um as it moves across the line of
sight due to being very near to
us and by uh the early part of the 1900s
we've been able to make Parallax
measurements using the diameter of the
Earth's orbit as a Baseline and come up
with a distance of 12 light years for
the star so that made it the second
nearest
sunlike star after the alpha centuri
system which is the subject of another
one of my
thoughts so what do we find well TTI
let's compare it with Saul our sun and
both of them are actually classed as G
type Stars sometimes we call those
yellow dwarfs although the sun is
perhaps more accurately a white star
it's at the hot end of the g
classfication a G2 he's numbers go g0
for the hottest to G9 at the far end So
Sol at G2 is quite a hot uh member of
the gclass cetti on the other hand is a
G8 at the cooler end of things and
precisely 428 degrees Kelvin cooler so
the numbers there you can see
4344 Kelvin versus
5772 Kelvin if you want the exact
numbers now now the reason it is a
little bit cooler is because it is less
massive it's about 80% of the mass and
about 80% of the radius now 80% of the
radius you have to square that to see
how much area that it would uh be
showing to you as its face so in fact
with a lower temperature and a
considerably smaller area the power
output that you see um over the whole
surface area of the star is only about
half that 50% or so of the sun and it
rotates a bit slower it takes 34 days to
go around compared to 25 for our sun so
not very different just a little bit
smaller a little bit cooler little bit
lower power and a little bit slower
rotating but it is older it's estimated
to be 5.8 billion years old b yr a giga
year so billion years so that's 25%
older than our son and that was very
interesting because it meant it'd been
around a long time and if uh alien life
had formed on a planet around caletti it
would have had so much longer to undergo
Evolution and to develop into an
intelligent species and there might be
you know little green men that were had
been occupying their planet for a
billion years or more older than uh the
Earth so very Advan advanced technology
as a possibility there very
intriguing it's very similar to the sun
because it also has an 11year star spot
cycle now at the moment that seems to be
quite weak and it's undergoing a low
activity phase perhaps similar to when
the sun went into a low activity State
during the M minimum and the period of
the little ice age when there were frost
faes on the TS and low temperatures all
over the world world as a result of weak
activity from the uh
Sun now there's a possibility that t
said he's got a companion our our son
does not have a companion as far as we
know not detected anything anywhere near
to Saul but there's been an observation
of a dim little 13th magnitude star in
the same general area as to City just
137 Arc seconds away an arkc is a 60th
of a degree of a minute which is a 60th
of a degree so
137 over
3,600 of a degree it's not very far at
all but it might just be a line of sight
chance event it might have nothing to do
with it it might not be captured
gravitationally so we're still uh not
sure about that
one now when astronomers talk about the
elemental makeup the composition of
Stars they often refer to metals and
when they say metal they mean anything
that isn't hydrogen or helium anything
from lithium onwards in the periodic
table much to the annoyance of chemists
who of course know that carbon oxygen
fluorine sulfur aren't Metals at all yet
they're heavy elements but astronomers
just lump everything together that is
not the two primordial gases of hydrogen
and helium as
Metals now because those heavier
elements are only made in Stars the
universe gradually gets dirtier and
dirtier with them and you can use the
amount of these elements that you see in
the atmospheres of stars as a clue to
their age and in fact the date when they
were formed working forwards because the
universe is gradually being enriched so
if they're very clean they probably
formed a long time
ago and you can Express that as the
metallicity the ratio of metals to
hydrogen the
sun well it was originally defined as
zero but it's
0.012 with a modern me method and that's
the base 10 logarithm of the ratio of
ion to
hydrogen tetti well it's actually
negative negative n.5 so it's got a
third as many metals as
so that's
in line with it having been born earlier
and being that much older an extra 1.8
billion years or so older than the Earth
the Sun but that low
micity probably also points towards it
having less of the material to go ahead
and make rocky planets which is of
course one of the things we're really
interested in and I've put a picture of
the globular cluster here se8 object
number 13 the great globular cluster in
Hercules because uh it's an example of
very very old Stars which have very very
low metallicity they were born 12
billion years ago and when the universe
was really clean and mostly composed of
just hydrogen and helium and here's a
little chart which shows you um that
there is a trend a trend towards lower
metal content so we've got age across
the bottom and at the side we've got the
metallicity ratio with zero well near
the top but not quite at the top
negative going below uh so things being
cleaner towards the bottom of the
diagram and this is one of those
logarithmic uh log of metals St hydrogen
ratios that I mentioned and you can see
that young Stars marked in blue tend to
be up towards the top in the dirty end
of things and they get progressively
further down
to cleaner when they get to being much
older stars but it's a bit of a mess um
and if you had something which fell into
that sort of middle range at about minus
.25 it could really fit over a very wide
range of the uh horizontal age axis so
it's it's a guide but it's not a
fantastically good one there are all
sorts of reasons why that's quite a
difficult measurement to make
now when studying T setti it's been
shown that from radial velocity
estimates looking at the Doppler effect
of the shifting to and fro of the star
itself that there aren't any really
massive planets in tight orbits around
the star so no Jupiter Mass objects in
less than 15E long orbits we've now been
able to ascertain gradually improving
the data since the first measurements
back in
1988 importantly this rules out very
clearly any hot Jupiters big giant
planets that have spiraled in and are
now orbiting close to the star those we
think would have quite a disastrous
effect on any earthlike Planet trying to
orbit round the star if you had a giant
planet like Jupiter carering through it
would uh really mess up your
day so what have we found well
2012 four super earth type planets were
detected two of them possibly in the
habitable zone the other two little bit
doubtful there have been Doubt cast on
them since and then in 2017 four more
were possibly found including a
jupiter-like planet 20 Au away so the
number of planets around TTI is at least
four and it's possibly as many as eight
we're not absolutely certain
of the ones we do know about some of
them five we think have this super earth
range of masses of two to six times the
mass of the Earth and are orbiting from
quite close in in 14 day long orbits out
to two year long orbits 640 days of
those the E and F planets were
absolutely sure about now they've been
confirmed and there is some doubt over
the others that BC and D planets but
we've also detected G and H on quite
interior orbits and we've got the solar
system underneath there shown for scale
so you can see that e is orbiting
between the Mercury and Venus and F is
orbiting between Earth and Mars in terms
of distances but that's interesting
because of course the habitable zone for
the star is closer in with the heat
output being only half that of the sun
this means that the Zone over which
liquid water could exist on the surface
at a sensible temperature goes from
about 0.55 to about
1.16 astronomical units so it puts
Planet e right on the inner Edge perhaps
uh very Venus like in terms of being too
hot and Planet F rather Mars like right
on the outer edge of the habitable zone
but remember these are bigger planets
than the
earth here we are to scale is Earth with
TTI e and t f in terms of these super
Earth estimates that we have for them so
double and triple the radius which means
they've got quite a lot more mass and a
lot more surface gravity and because of
that higher gravity when they might have
eight times the mass in an object only
three times the size they would be uh
attracting their gases the volatile
compounds much more strongly have a much
higher escape velocity and so they would
tend to keep a lot more of the um
material in the
atmosphere having a closer look at Town
setti e say it was detected in 2012 and
refined in 2017 we're now very sure
about it um that it exists at
least we estimate are that it's four
times the Earth's mass or orbiting at
0.552 astronomical units in 168 days and
at that distance the heat it receives
per square uh meter is
171% of what you would get at Earth so
not quite as much as Venus which is 190
but uh almost
there now if it had an earthlike
atmosphere the surface temperature would
be about 68 C but being bigger it's
probably a thicker atmosphere and so you
can estimate that that would really be
quite
toasty Now set F on the other hand on
the outer edge of the habitable zone
also discovered at the same time so we
have a
1.35 astronomical unit orbit roughly the
same as Mars 642 days to complete a lap
and somewhere between four and six times
the mass of the Earth so quite a beast
and nearly double the Earth's
radius this is perhaps considered to be
the most habitable exoplanet that we
know of orbiting around a sunlike star
and it's only just next door but with
the sun uh Power versus tetti power
being so different with only half the
Heat this one receives just 32% of the
heat energy that the Earth
gets however again that thick waterr
atmosphere could could bring the
temperature up from a fairly chilly uh
level up to a much more uh tolerable
level well we've got to remember one
thing T city is a little bit smaller
than the earth and a bit sorry than the
Sun and a bit older and as stars age
they heat up so the power output now is
greater than it was a billion years ago
and so really tetti F has probably been
outside the habitable zone rather in the
fridge in the Deep Freeze too cold uh
and only recently has the temperature
begun to warm up as the star has got
hotter our sun Soul has got 7% hotter in
the last billion years or so it does
make a
difference another interesting thing
that's been detected is a disc of debris
we've got an infrared picture on the
right there and an artist's impression
to the bottom and that photograph that I
opened with of a large impact on a
planet that's entirely hypothetical but
this disc of dust consisting of dust
asteroids comets icy fragments Etc is 10
times the density of the dust and
asteroids and so forth that we have in
our solar system and this does tend to
point towards rather a heavy bombardment
if you are trying to uh evolve and live
on one of these planets that we've been
talking about they probably be subjected
to quite a frequent um extinction level
events due to heavy
impacts on the other hand there has been
this detection of a possible super
Jupiter in a wide orbit and we think
Jupiter May well protect us from a lot
of these sorts of impacts in the inner
solar system and maybe this planet is
protecting our satti E and F by
deflecting a lot of the incoming bolides
now such a a famous star as this one in
terms of the search for extraterrestrial
life that Frank Drake perhaps the father
of
seti when he was setting up project osma
back in the 1960s and 70s he selected as
Prime candidate tal setti and directed
his radio antennas to it for about 200
hours monitoring at a frequency of 1420
mahz which is the uh natural frequency
of water and you didn't find anything
and we haven't found anything since
there's been lots and lots of searches
and they've all turned up negative but
it's a long way away and accidental
Transmissions would be very very weak we
would probably only really stand a
chance of detecting a signal
deliberately beamed at us so interest in
trying to use things like James Webb to
look at the atmospheres of these planets
in the tati system and see if we can
find any bio signatures is very
high we were going to use the
terrestrial planet finder this was
slated to be launched and Target tetti
amongst 177,000 potential habitable
systems very large number um but
unfortunately the Ral Planet finder
never got off the ground it would have
been a laser controlled array of
separate telescopes making an
interferometer in space unfortunately it
didn't make the cut and the budget cut
led to its cancellation so that was a
terrific shame this would have been just
the tool for it now there is one caveat
on all of this which is that when we
look at T C we can tell that from the
way that the spectral lines are modified
by the rotation made broader that it's
quite likely that the spin axis of the
star is almost pointing at us and we're
looking down on the pole and this does
tend to suggest that we're just a 7
degree off axis tilt there but the
estimates of the masses of the planets
that we've been talking about might be
wrong it is sort of new news and they
might be rather more massive than we've
been suggesting so more mini Neptune
than super Earth which would be a shame
because that would mess everything up in
terms of habitability I would imagine
but then aliens could be
different and in fact tetti has turned
up many many times in fiction there are
lots of different sci-fi stories in
which tetti appears Wikipedia has page
after page of it that's probably the
most famous star system after Alpha
centu
for this very reason and I just wanted
to mention one of them a book I've
recently read which is called project
Hail Mary by Andy we it's a number one
bestseller and if you get the chance to
read this and you like this sort of
thing you'll love this book it's all
about uh possibilities of life in and
around the local star system and a lot
of the action centers around tetti but I
won't say any more about it other than
go read the book it's fabulous so with
that I'll bring it to an end and thank
you very much for listening I hope You'
enjoyed that and do have a look at some
of my other videos if you get the chance
thanks bye